This semester we have been mapping populations using agent-based modeling. We have been able to draw conclusions about the populations based off of different variables. Mapping interactions and changes of humans, animals, plants, cities, or other developing groups can be very beneficial. But it can also cause issues if used incorrectly or with malice. Agent-based modeling allows for a further understanding of the everchanging world around us. We can make educated predictions that can be used to help recovery teams provide the right amount of resources, health experts to better understand the potential travel of disease, coral reef reconstruction, and even social scientists draw better conclusions about their data. 


Throughout this course we have focused on a lower to middle income country. I focused on Nicaragua. LMIC locations do not always have the best resources to conduct full analyses on their people or communities. They also tend to be countries that could benefit the most from such analysis. By using agent-based modeling, I was able to use other agents, such as nighttime lights, to plot areas of higher density which I could then assume to be urban areas. I then was able to lay the road maps over these points to see how people are most likely to travel between these densely populated areas. One could continue to plot more and more layers on top of this map to get a fuller picture of Nicaragua. This data can be used to map the spread of disease, where new medical centers or schools should be placed, or maybe even where a new road should be constructed. The possibilities are endless. But because the possibilities are endless, the use of agent-based modeling could be used for harm. 


There are two different ways that these kinds of models could be potentially harmful. The first is by not understanding the data put into the model. Correlation is not causation. Big data is very powerful. IF you are making a model you have to understand what your variables mean and their actual relevance. Your variables have to be meaningful. To prevent this, you need to make sure that you understand what you are plotting and your variables. Agent-based modeling has a lot of potential, but it also needs to be used correctly. Another potential negative use is when people use the model to create chaos or harm. For example, many relief groups use these models to plot how they distribute resources or support. If wealthy or powerful people figure out the deciding factors as to how the relief groups go about determining areas of need, they may make changes to their lives or communities to skew the data. For example, a relief organization was using the variable of number of houses with thatched roofs to determine poverty. When people discovered this, the wealthier people started covering their sheds with thatched roofs in order to skew the resources towards their communities. By making sure you are backing up your model with other sources and making sure your models are up to date. 


When investigating different uses for agent-based modeling, I was able to explore how it is useful when predicting coral reef reconstruction and how social scientist can benefit from the modeling. Coral reefs are hard to predict and map due to their size, timeframe, and variety of coral types and needs. Agent-based modeling will help the challenging endeavor of predicting coral reef habits. By running simulations over and over again, the model can identify combinations that can provide the greatest resilience for coral reefs. This will help ecologists design reef management and restoration strategies based off of the predictions generated from the agent-based model. Agent-based modeling provides better observational models than variable based modeling, VBM. Social psychology is rarely the is the “result of isolated decisions by individuals, but rather as the result of repeated interactions between multiple individuals over time.” This makes social psychology a good match for agent-based modeling. Agent-based modeling uses the collected data and autonomous agents to create a simulation of the environment and the predictions. This way social psychologists can actually map the many different interactions that are at play and make accurate predictions.


In conclusion, there is a lot of potential for agent-based modeling to help better development in many different levels. It is just important to make sure the models produced are actually useful and meaningful. I feel as if agent-based modeling will continue to develop as we learn more and more about human development and how to appropriately use big data. Ultimately, if used correctly, agent-based modeling can help people better understand and serve the world around them.
